in this video let us learn how to implement a
queue using a linked list
We know we can implement a queue using an array
But if we implemented using an array we need to
specify the array size at the beginning that is
at compile
Time we cannot change the size of an array at run time
so it will only work for a fixed number of
elements or as a fixed size queue so
A solution to this problem is we can use the
linked list to implement a queue in the linked list
We can change its size at runtime so let us
see how to perform and enqueue and dequeue operation
Then we implement queue Using linked list we need to
keep track of rear and front where insertion and deletion
happens
So first let us see how to perform and enqueue
So for the linked list here we don't need a
reference to head
Instead we will need front and rear at the opposite
ends and at first the queue is empty
It's a node front equal to null and rear equal
to null and we have the enqueue function to
insert a value into the queue and we will pass
the value to be inserted into this function
So we have public void enqueue of in val
Let the value to be inserted be ten
So how can we insert a value here First we
have to create a new node with val then check if
the queue is empty
If it is then we need to make both front
and rear point to the new node
If it is not insert the new node at rear
so let us see how it works
First we have to create a new node to store
this value
So write node new node equal to new node
So a new node is created and now we need
to add the value to it
So write new node dot data equal to Val and
let its next point to null
So we have new node dot next equal to null so
10 is added to this node and it is pointing
to null now the node is ready
Now we know insertion happens at the rear end so
the node should be inserted at rear end
But we should first check
If the queue is empty that is the linked list
here check if front equal to null and rear equal to null and
it is here which means the queue is empty
So the new node that we are going to insert
will be both rear and Front
So said front equal to rear equal to new
node
So we have the queue now with one element in
which is both the front and rear
Now let us insert another element 20
So val equal to 20
So first create the new node and assigned the value
to it
So 20 is added at the data part and make
it a point to null
So the node is ready
Now we need to insert it
So first check if the queue is empty
So we have if front equal to null and rear
equal to null
But it is not so
We go to the else part and it should be
inserted at rear
So write rear dot next equal to new node
So the new node is inserted after rear and now
we need to make rear point to new node so write rear
equal to new node
And that is done
And we now have the queue with two elements 10
and 20 where front is pointing 10 and rear is
pointing 20
Now let us insert another element 30 so call
enqueue
Of 30
So first create the new node and assigned the value
to it
So 30 is added at the data part and make
it a point to null
So the node is ready and now we need to
insert it
So check
If the queue is empty so we have if front
equal to null and rear equal to null but it is
not so
Go to the else part
It should be inserted at rear so write rear dot
next equal to new node
So the new node is inserted after rear now make
rear point to
New node
So write rear equal to new node
We now have the queue with three elements 10 20
and 30 where
front is pointing 10 and rear is pointing 30
So that is how we can perform and enqueue operation so let
us see how to perform dequeue operation
So as we know queue is first in first out
data structure
Insertion happens at rear end and deletion happens at front end
so when we call this dequeue function the element at
front of the queue will be deleted
So we have public void
dequeue first
We need to check If the queue is empty
That he is if front is null
And if it is then deletion is not possible since
the queue is empty so printed
But here it is not empty
So go to else part and print the element which
is to be dequeued so print
dequeued element is front dot data
So we will get the output
dequeued element equal to 10
Now we need to delete front and make its next
node different of queue So we have front equal to
front dot Next
So front equal to 2000
Now
Now we need to check whether the queue has become
empty by this deletion operation
So write if front equal to null and if it is
we have to set rear equal to null
Also this case is for deleting the last element of
the queue
But it is not true here So that is how
we can perform dequeue operation
Now that is called dequeue again
So first check if the queue is empty but it
is not so go to else part and print the
element at front So we will get dequeued element
equal to 20 Now make its next node the front
of queue by writing front equal to front dot Next
So front equal to 3000 Now Now check if front
equal to null but it is not so The operation is
now completed
Now let us call dequeue again
So first check if the queue is empty but it
is not so go to else and print the element
at front
So we will get dequeued
element equal to 30 Now we need to make
its next node the new front
So we have front equal to null now check If
the queue has become empty and we have front equal
to null so This if will be true So we
have to set rear equal to null So set rear equal
to null And the deletion operation is now completed now
call the dequeue again
And in this function first we check If front equal to
null and it is so it prints dequeue operation
is not possible since the queue is empty So that
is how we can perform enqueue and dequeue operation in
a queue using linked list
Now let us discuss about the time complexity as we
just learned
We are maintaining two references
rear and Front
So in enqueue operation we only need to create the
node with the value and inserted after rear and make
it rear
So only a constant time is needed
So the time complexity is order of one and in
dequeue operation
We only need to make its next node to be front and
check for last node deletion incase which also takes
a constant time
So again the time complexity is order of one.